# CS 4345 (Operating Systems)

## Assignment – 1 [Spring 20 20 ]

```
Due date: 11:00 p.m., Tuesday, February 18 , 20 20
```

[ _This is pair-programming exercise where two students (existing pairs) will work together and have one
submission. So, no individual submission is expected._ **_However, it is mandatory to include names of
both students as comment line at the top of the code._** ]

**Problem** :
The Collatz sequence in Mathematics is a sequence of positive numbers that starts from a given
integer, and the next term in the sequence is created using the current term following the rule:

## Tnext = Tcurrent/2, if Tcurrent is even, and Tnext = 3Tcurrent + 1, if Tcurrent is odd

It is conjected that all Collatz sequence end at 1 if the rule is continuously applied on a starting
number. For example, if the starting number is 17, then the sequence is:
17 , 52, 26, 13, 40, 20, 10, 5, 16, 8, 4, 2, 1
Another example: if starting number is 12, then the sequence is: 12, 6, 3, 10, 5, 16, 8, 4, 2, 1

**Coding** :
Write a C code using fork() system call that generates this sequence in the child process. Since the
parent and child processes have their own data copy, it is important to get the initial number from the
user in the child process only. The child process is also responsible to display the output. During this
whole time (until child displays the final output), the parent process should wait for the child process
to complete.

**Requirements:**
The following must be ensured and displayed through the program output
i) Parent pid and child pid
ii) Indicate when parent starting and ending
iii) Indicate when child starts and ends
iv) Prompt user (with appropriate message) to enter a choice of positive integer (perform
necessary error checking to ensure that a positive integer is entered)
v) Display the entire sequence starting from the user entered positive integer

[ **Hint** : _You can use scanf() function in C to read the input. Its syntax is: scanf(“%d”, &n); where n is the
integer variable used for storing the user input._ ]

**Submission** : Name your code file as **lastname1_lastname2.c** where lastname1 and lastname 2 are last
names of the students in the pair. Include course name, semester, and assignment identifier (Assign 1)
as program comments at the top of your code. Submit the source file through BlazeVIEW.
