# CS 4345 (Operating Systems)

## Assignment – 2 [Spring 20 20]

## Due date: Sunday, 1 March 2020 , 1 1 :00 p.m.

**Row-major dot product of two matrices:**

Given two numerical matrices (which is row-column arrangements of numbers) A and B, where matrix A
contains m rows and n columns and matrix B contains k rows and n columns, the **_row-major dot product_**
of A and B is defined as a matrix P, where P contains m rows and k columns. Entries in matrix P for row i
and column j (the cell (i, j)) is the **dot product** of ith row vector from A and jth row vector from B. For

example, if A is a 3× 3 matrix!

### 1 1 2

### 3 4 5

### 5 6 7

```
) and B is a 4 × 3 matrix *
```

### 2 3 − 1

```
5 3 2
1 4 0
− 1 2 3
```

- , then the row-major dot

product of A and B is given by matrix P =!

### 3 12 5 7

### 13 37 19 20

### 21 57 29 28

```
), which is a 3× 4 matrix. It is also to be
```

noted that the two matrices are row-major dot product compatible when they have same number of
columns. Also note how the individual cell values of P are calculated. For example, the value 7 at cell ( 1 ,
4 ) in P is the dot product of row-vector 1 of A and row-vector 4 of B. That is,

(1 1 2)•(-1 2 3) = 1*(-1) + 1*2 + 2\*3 = -1 + 2 + 6 = 7

**Multi-threaded implementation of the above problem:**

In this problem, you are required to write a multi-threaded program to find the row-major dot product of
two matrices. The following provides a design guideline:

1. Calculate each cell of the product matrix P in a separate worker thread. This will involve
   determining the dimension of the product matrix. The number of worker threads is same as
   number of cells in the product matrix.
2. The main (or, parent) thread will initialize the matrices A and B and allocate space to hold the
   matrix P. Ideally, these matrices should be declared as global data so that each worker thread has
   access to these matrices.
3. The parent thread will create required number of worker threads. Each worker thread is
   responsible for calculating one cell value of the product matrix. For example, a worker thread
   responsible for cell (i, j) of the product matrix is passed the row i from first matrix and row j from
   the second matrix to calculate the dot product.
4. Once all worker threads have completed, the main thread will output the product matrix P. This
   requires the main thread to wait for all worker threads to finish before it can output the value of
   the matrix product. [ _Hint: you may check use of join() or yield() to make the main thread waiting._ ]

**Program requirements:**

The initial matrices A and B are in a file. Your program should read the data from the file. **The file name
is provided as command-line argument at execution time**. That is, the user may use the following
command, after compilation, on a console to execute your program:

> > java <program-name> <datafile-name>

**Caution** : **your program must not prompt (ask) the user to enter a filename, nor there should be any
“hard-coding” of the input file path**.

**Data file format** :

The data file format is as follows: first line has 4 integer numbers, separated by single spaces, specifying
dimension of two matrices. For example, 3 2 4 2 means matrix A has dimension 3 × 2 and matrix B has
dimension 4 × 2. Your program should read this line at the beginning to determine whether two matrices
are row-major dot product compatible and **indicate (display) the decision with appropriate message**.

Then there is a line gap followed by first matrix cell values (written in row-column arrangement). Each
column is separated by two spaces and each row ends with a line break. After first matrix data, there is a
line gap followed by second matrix data. Check the sample data file **Matrices.txt**

The program then reads the matrices, completes calculation as specified above, and produces the output
on console in a matrix format (standard row-column format). You can assume that the data file will have
integer value matrices only. However, the given data file is just a sample. Instructor may test your
program using another, but similar, data file where the matrices have larger dimensions.

**[** MUST] Multi-threading requirements\*\* :

Each worker thread displays the beginning and ending of their work together with the calculated
value. For example, the worker thread calculating cell (i, j) of the product matrix should display the
following: “Thread <i, j> starts calculation” (to indicate beginning of thread run) and “Thread <i, j>
returns <cell-value>” to indicate end of that thread’s run. [ _The values of i, j, cell-values should reflect
appropriate values._ ]

[ _Hint: these print statements should be within the run() method of the worker thread_ ]

**All exceptions must be caught properly** (use of proper try-catch blocks).

**Submission:** Each source code file should contain the following as coding comments at the top: course
number (CS4345), Semester/Year (Spring 2020 ), assignment identifier (Assignment 2 ), and authors of the
program (both students’ names). You may use regular Java comments. Submit your source file(s) through
BlazeVIEW submission box.
